# Silcon Valley Diversity Visualization 

## Our Datasets:
The first dataset we use is called 2018/W46: Diversity in Tech, which uses congregated companies and press reports on diversity at top tech companies. The variables of value in this dataset are the year, the type of company (i.e. Social Media, Tech, etc.), company name (AirBnB, eBay), the percent breakdowns of females and males, and the proportions of white, Asian, Latino, black, multi-racial, or other-identifying employees. The makers of this dataset sifted through the global employee data of several leading tech firms, where available, and inputted these percentages into the dataset. This dataset was particularly useful because it allowed us to see the representation across different races through proportions of the total employee population. However, the second dataset, Silicon-Valley-Diversity-Data, provided us with more nuance for where the employee diversity lies within the different company tiers. This dataset comes from EEO-1 reports from Silicon Valley tech companies, compiled by Reveal from The Center for Investigative Reporting. This dataset was created as a result of Reveal winning a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit against the U.S. Department of Labor last year. The variables in this dataset are the company names, the year the data was collected (2015), race, gender, job category (Technicians, Administrative, Executive/Senior managers, Professionals, etc.), and the count of employees in that category. Thus, the second dataset lets us understand how each identity is represented within the different employee superiority levels.
 
Prior to building visualizations, the two datasets were merged so that for each company, data was provided on both the percent breakdowns for race and gender, as well as the counts of employees of each race and gender at each position level. This merge was performed on Jupyter Notebook using the pandas package. Upon combining the two CSV files, to eliminate repetition in the data for any given date, the dataset was grouped using groupby() by company and date. The second dataset used contained the company's breakdown by position based on race and gender across years. For this dataset we chose to just use data from the most recent year,2016. To make the data accessible and usable,we created a dictionary of dictionaries with each company as a key to another dictionary with each position as a key to another dictionary containing a breakdown by either race or gender (different data structure for race and gender). Then we created a final dictionary to access both data structures based on the two filter types (race and gender). In our final visualizations, we only used data about the executives at each company, but the data for each race and gender of the executives at each company were accessed through this data structure.

## Design Rationale:
The first visualizations, “Breakdown of Employees’ Races in Top Tech Companies” and “Breakdown of Employee Gender in Top Tech Companies”, allows us to understand the differences across the ten companies in their gender and race representation in their employees. By using a stacked bar chart, with the y-axis from 0-100%, and the x-axis representing each company, we can use the length of each color within the bar to compare the percentage of each race or gender across companies. We decided to also have the bottom-most stack within each stacked bar to represent the percentage of white employees, because not only is white the majority race, but it allows us to see more clearly the lack of representation of minorities. Fluctuations in the bottom column are the most salient, since they all start from the same starting position on the y-axis (0%), and thus we can compare how “white” every tech company is. Comparing the length of bars through a stacked bar chart is also easier than comparing surface areas of slices of two different pie charts, as varying length is typically easier to discern than varying surface areas. Thus, rather than create multiple pie charts for each company and comparing slices of the different pies, we decided against this information overload and streamlined the process of deriving insight from visualizations through implementation of a stacked bar chart.

The marks in this stacked bar chart represent the percentage of employees for each company that fall within a certain race. For example, a mark in this chart is 54% in Apple’s “% White” column. We map this data onto the visual element by using the following channels: position on the common scale (for the % White bars and % Multi bars, which start at 0 and 100% on the y-axis), position on the unaligned scale (for the rest of the bars), and length. These channels represent ordered or numerical attributes, however, an additional channel, color hue, represents the categorical attribute of which race the data is representing. We did the same thing for the stacked bar chart for gender, where the blue representing the percentage of employees that were male started as the bottom bar, thus we can see more clearly the fluctuations to understand which companies are the most male-dominated. The magnitude channels which represent numerical attributes are again positioned on common and unaligned scales, length, and the channel showing categorical attributes is color hue, which displays the gender attribute as male or female.

While at first, we were hesitant to jump too quickly into implementing pie charts to represent our data, we decided that it was the best way to effectively portray the nuances in race and gender representation within the top executives of each company. We recognize that pie charts are not ideal for observing trends across multiple companies, or for comparing more than a few pieces of data. However, after analyzing the tradeoffs that come from a pie chart, we decided that it was the most effective communication tool to inform the audience with a meaningful data comparison which portrays the disparities in representation of identities within tech executives. Our goal for our second visualization was to do exactly that; we wanted to show the make-up of executives of each tech company, to provide more nuanced insight into those at the top of Silicon Valley. Thus, we created our pie charts, “The Top Executives at [Company] by Race” and “The Top Executives at [Company] by Gender”. The marks in our pie graphs are the slices within each pie.The channels in these pie graphs are the area of each slice, which represents their percentage of the whole. Thus, Cisco’s 79% Male is represented by a slice of the pie that makes up 76% of the total circle’s surface area. The second channel used in our pie charts are color hues, as blue represents the male identification, and pink the female identification, of the gender category, and different colors represent the different races as well. As we want to visualize the make-up of gender and race of each company’s executive team, we can, at a glance, understand the proportion of the whole that each identity represents; especially in examining each company in isolation, the pie charts are an excellent portrayal of data.

## Interactive Elements:
Our project has a multitude of interactive elements, including1)the tab to switch between race and gender, 2) displaying corresponding pie chart for each moused-over stacked bar, 3) displaying race/gender category and percentage for each moused-over stacked bar and enlarging them when moused-over, 3) emboldening moused-over slices of the pie chart, 4) displaying the race/gender category and percentage of moused-over slices, and 5) interactive company selection tab where users can click on the company for whom they wish to see a pie chart.

First, we would like to discuss our rationale between using mouseover as our interactivity prompt for displaying race and gender categories and percentages, as well as for displaying each stacked bar’s corresponding pie chart. There is a trade-off between using mouseover, rather than click, for our interactivity prompt. However, while click is advantageous for its usability, we decided that mouseover is best suited for our purposes due to its quick interactivity and ease of exploration. The user, when interacting with the graph, can immediately discover how to derive more data off of our webpage. Immediately, upon moving their mouse even just a little, can discover that they have the power to more closely examine each tech company’s executive team gender and race breakdown. While sometimes mouseover can get confusing with what exactly is being moused-over which brings about a certain outcome, by enlarging, emboldening, or highlighting moused-over elements, users immediately understand what is focused on. Additionally, other visual elements, such as appearing labels, headings, captions, and a useful legend, help the user understand our visualizations.

Next, we would like to explain our jurisdiction in our tab bar. This is primarily because we were very passionate about discovering insights into company diversity in terms of both race and gender; a company truly cannot be inclusive and equitable, much less successful, without appropriate representation across both categories. However, we did not want to overwhelm the user with information about both categories at once. We decided it was best for them to first understand the visualizations of one aspect, and then have the ability to switch over to the other one when desired. We made this tab bar discoverable by placing it right underneath the project title, so immediately after the user reads the title, they will notice the options they have for data visualizations. We made them usable by darkening buttons hovered over, indicating that users have the ability to click on it to bring about a new visualization, as changing background colors typically indicate on buttons.

Our next interactive elements were enlarging and emboldening the moused-over stacked bars and pie slices. We also displayed the stacked bars and pie slices category name and percentage value. This is actually quite an extraordinary feature, when combined, because it allows the user to toggle from the stacked bar, enlarge it and see the corresponding percentage value, and then hover over the pie chart to see that corresponding percentage value. Then, the user can compare the two percentages to see how it changes between the overall employee population and just the executive suite. For example, they can mouse over eBay’s “% White'' bar, and the label “% White: 52%” appears, and then they view the corresponding pie chart for eBay’s executive suite, mouse-over the “% White” slice, and see the “White: 77%” label. Thus, they can derive the critical insight that the probability that an employee is white increases from 52% to 77% when moving from the general employee population to the executive suite; thus, the user learns that the executive suite is misrepresented of the overall company diversity, and more white employees are promoted. The ability to combine valuable information from graphs after mousing over the corresponding attributes makes these interactivity elements quite interesting, and their moused-over proponent makes them very discoverable and usable.

Finally, our company selection tab allows the user to specify which company’s executive suite they wish to observe. This tab is made obvious through its distinct background color and border; further, it is usable as it uses the same stylistic attributes as the Race-Gender tab. Users will be eager to take advantage of this feature if they hope to focus on the executive suites of multiple companies, and compare the values, without having to hover over all the different stacked bars.

## The Story:
Technology inextricably integrated into almost every aspect of our lives has an unimaginably significant influence on who we are, what we think, and how we interact. What’s more is that a significant portion of the technology we do use is controlled by a select few tech giants, such as Google, Facebook, or Apple. In order to make the utilization and implementation of technology not just equitable, but empowering, for every individual possible, technology companies without a doubt must prioritize diversity of people, diversity of thought, and diversity of experiences. This all starts with who they employ to engineer, market, sell, or administer their technologies, with whom they share the power of influence. Unfortunately, it is unmistakably obvious that the Silicon Valley, and the most influential tech giants at the top of it, fail us in their employee diversity. This data analysis uncovers the disparities in employment across race and gender within Silicon Valley’s key players, and highlights the inequalities posing issues to us not just as consumers, but as employees of these very companies.

Our visualization displays the breakdown across race and gender for the top ten tech companies in Silicon Valley. The differences across each company in what proportion of the employee body is composed of each gender and race is illustrated by the main visualization, the stacked bar chart. By setting each company as its own bar, and comparing them across the x-axis, the audience can see which company has the most diverse employee body, or which company has the most equitable female representation. Our data visualizations gave us many surprising insights. First, the company with the largest proportion of white employees was Salesforce, meanwhile the smallest was Nvidia. Meanwhile, Nvidia also had the smallest percentage of female employees, so while it has decent racial representation, it lacks gender equality.

Additionally, LinkedIn and Pinterest have the best gender equality (58% and 55% male, respectively), but still, LinkedIn’s executive suite is only 37% female, which, actually, is the highest percentage across all tech companies’ executive suites. Google (13%), Intel (13%), Nvidia (12%) and Pinterest (13%) all had the lowest percentage of female leaders, however across entire employee populations, Pinterest has the largest female percentage (45%), but Nvidia the smallest (17%). This contradiction highlights the importance of understanding the nuances in one’s data, and truly taking a holistic approach to diversity. Even if a company has a seemingly equal representation of genders in its employee body, it might not actually be that equitable, if females cannot hold leadership positions in the same volume as their male counterparts.

Examining our race stacked bar and pie graphs also gives us valuable information on each company’s diversity. Surprisingly, Apple has the least amount of minority representation up top, with 82% of its executive suite being white. On the other hand, Pinterest has the most minority representation, with 50% of its executive suite being white. However, Apple and Pinterest have similar percent white values for the total employee population, showing that while a company may look diverse on the surface, underneath, it might not always be equitable and inclusive. Twitter, Salesforce, and Pinterest were the only companies with no black executive members, despite having a typical percentage of black employees. Uber and Apple both had the highest percentage of black employees, at 9%, however, only 3% of Apple’s and 1% of Uber’s executives were black.

The most consistent and significant takeaways we found were that gender and race diversity in Silicon Valley is, undoubtedly, unsatisfactory and frankly unacceptable. As the future leaders of this industry, we must task not just ourselves, but our peers, classmates, even professors, which the knowledge we gained from our visualizations. Not just are certain demographics sorely and unacceptably misrepresented among some of Silicon Valley’s most influential stakeholders, but this misrepresentation only worsens as employees move up in the ranks. More often than not, if a company appears to be more diverse than the others in their general employee population, their executive suite still maintains the same race and gender discrimination that we strive to fight against. Even if a tech company appears “diverse” in who they have on their payroll, they might not always be equitable in the way they staff their board room. We have to look beyond just generalized numbers, and find the discrimination that lies within the nuances of company heirarchy and influence. If Silicon Valley genuinely strives to be the equity safe haven that many companies pride themselves in valuing, then they must show this with who they have not just in their warehouses, logistics centers, or sales departments, but more importantly, who they have sitting on the executive floor, who’s name signs off on the decisions that impact millions and millions of users, from each and every background.